feat: add orchid release article (#219)
Vanilla-OS/website: articles/2024-07-28-vanilla-os-2-orchid-stable-is-here.md

  - Multiple Package Managers
  - Access any Package Manager
layout: article
comments: true
---

Introducing Vanilla OS 2 Orchid: Over a year of meticulous development has culminated in this complete rewrite of our operating system. Orchid redefines simplicity and performance, providing a seamless and intuitive experience for everyone regardless of whether you're a web surfer, gamer, developer, or designer. Enjoy an out-of-the-box experience that meets all your needs.

![Vanilla OS 2 Orchid](/uploads/vanilla-os-2-intro.svg)

Our goals remain the same, but they are now more ambitious: **simplicity**, **cleanliness**, **freedom**, and an **obstruction-free** experience.

To achieve these ambitious goals, we meticulously collected your feedback from the previous version and engaged in thorough discussions, fueled by countless cups of coffee, maybe a few too many ☕️.

## Build to be...

Vanilla OS 2 (Orchid) is not just your new Operating System, it’s much more. We designed it with three fundamental concepts in mind:

<dynamic-panel-orchid-release />

But especially, Vanilla OS 2 Orchid is built to be **your** reliable partner in every task.

## Always Updated, but in Silence

> Orchid ensures your system is always up-to-date without interrupting your workflow. With smart updates that  check only when your device is idle, you get the latest features and security enhancements seamlessly. Set the update frequency that works best for you, and let Vanilla OS handle the rest quietly in the background.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Orchid ensures your system is always up-to-date without interrupting your workflow. With smart updates that check only when your device is idle, you get the latest features and security enhancements seamlessly. Set the update frequency that works best for you, and let Vanilla OS handle the rest quietly in the background.
```

![System Updates Window](/uploads/orchid-system-updates.png)

Are you watching that movie you love so much? Engaged in a furious race on your favorite racing game? Or maybe you’re live streaming? No problem, Orchid won’t push any updates and will let you use all the resources you need!  Enjoy a secure, efficient, and worry-free experience, knowing your system is always performing as its best!

![Update Extension](/uploads/orchid-update-extension.png)

## One or More Graphics Cards?

> Orchid takes full advantage of your device, whether you have one or multiple graphic cards, with its PRIME Utility, you can seamlessly switch between integrated and discrete GPUs based on your needs, allowing you to optimize performance and power usage, making it perfect for both casual users and those who require higher graphical performance for tasks like gaming or video editing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Orchid takes full advantage of your device, whether you have one or multiple graphic cards. With its PRIME Utility, you can seamlessly switch between integrated and discrete GPUs based on your needs, allowing you to optimize performance and power usage, and making it perfect for both casual users and those who require higher graphical performance for tasks like gaming or video editing.
```

![PRIME Utility](/uploads/orchid-prime-utility.png)

The on-demand feature is especially beneficial for laptops, where battery life can be significantly extended by combining the two graphics cards, using the integrated for less demanding tasks and the discrete for intensive applications.

## Compatible, with Everything

Orchid is designed to be compatible with virtually everything, ensuring you never feel left out. Whether you’re looking to run your favorite mobile apps, use familiar desktop applications, or explore a wide range of Linux distributions, we have you covered. Thanks to this versatility, you can seamlessly integrate your daily tech needs intro one powerful operating system.

<bento-orchid-release />

> Thanks to the vast and well-maintained catalog from Flathub, you can easily find and install the apps you know and love directly from our store, whether you need productivity tools like WPS Office, multimedia applications like Spotify, or gaming platforms like Steam, the extensive Flathub collection got you covered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thanks to the vast and well-maintained catalog from Flathub, you can easily find and install the apps you know and love directly from our store. Whether you need productivity tools like WPS Office, multimedia applications like Spotify, or gaming platforms like Steam, the extensive Flathub collection got you covered.
```

## Secure, for Real

Orchid takes your data security seriously, this is why we encrypt your personal data by default, ensuring it stays private and protected from unauthorized access.

> We’ve also introduced PolKit policies, which provide more granular control over administrative privileges. This means that administrative operations are handled securely and user-friendly, giving you the right level of access when you need it without compromising the overall security of the system. This way, no tool can execute arbitrary code without your consent, as all instructions are displayed on the screen and require your intervention.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We’ve also introduced PolKit policies, which provide more granular control over administrative privileges. This means that administrative operations are handled in a secure and user-friendly way, giving you the right level of access when you need it without compromising the overall security of the system. This way, no tool can execute arbitrary code without your consent, as all instructions are displayed on the screen and require your intervention.
```

![PolKit Policies](/uploads/orchid-polkit.svg)

> Now each user operates in an isolated environment, in fact when you open the terminal, you find yourself in a secure, customizable space similar to a traditional operating system. This setup allows you to install applications, personalize your settings, and make changes via the command line, all within a safe and contained environment. Something went wrong? Reset the console with `Alt + F2` and then `reset-vso` at any time without losing your personal data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now each user operates in an isolated environment. In fact, when you open the terminal, you find yourself in a secure, customizable space that works similar to a traditional operating system. This setup allows you to install applications, personalize your settings, and make changes via the command line, all within a safe and contained environment. Something went wrong? Reset the console with `Alt + F2` and then `reset-vso` at any time without losing your personal data.
```

![Integity Check](/uploads/orchid-integrity-check.svg)

The core system is verified for integrity at every boot, ensuring it has not been tampered with and preserving its functionality. If something goes wrong, Orchid will notify you of the issue, advising against proceeding with the device boot and inviting to revert to the previous state.

## Sideload Apps With Ease

Sideloading apps has never been easier. This new feature allows you to install .deb packages and Android apps (.apk) with just a double-click. This simple process makes adding new software to your system quick and hassle-free, enhancing your overall experience.

Once an application is installed, it is made available right from the applications menu.

![Slideload Utility](/uploads/sideload-utility-install.webp)

> Just keep in mind that installing unverfied apps from third-party sources is highly discouraged and not supported by out team, as these apps may introduce security risk, we’ve ensured that the Linux (VSO) and Android environments are isolated, but worth nothing that VSO has still access to the user data, so caution is advised.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Keep in mind that installing unverfied apps from third-party sources is highly discouraged and not supported by out team, as these apps may introduce security risks. We’ve ensured that the Linux (VSO) and Android environments are isolated, but it is worth nothing that VSO still has access to the user data, so caution is advised.
```

## Rollback in Seconds

> Did you encountered a system issue and needed to revert to a previous stable state? With Orchid, this is quite simple, if something goes wrong, you can select the previous state during boot. After logging in, Orchid will prompt you to perform a rollback, once confirmed, this rollback becomes permanent until the next update.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Have you encountered a system issue and wished you could revert to a previous stable state? With Orchid, this is quite simple. If something goes wrong, you can select the previous state during boot. After logging in, Orchid will prompt you to perform a rollback. If you accept, this rollback becomes permanent until the next update.
```

When a new update happens, the problematic state will get replaced with the new version of the operating system.

![Rollback Utility](/uploads/orchid-rollback.png)

> Why might you need to perform a rollback? Well, even though Orchid is designed to be stable and compatible, and its update system ensures the updates are only installed if they pass, and despite every update being meticulously tested by our developers, something can still go wrong. Having a recovery point is essential. For example, you might be using hardware that is not compatible with the update, and this is a scenario we cannot fully cover (yet).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Why would you need to perform a rollback? Even though Orchid is designed to be stable and compatible, and its update system ensures the updates are only installed if they pass, and despite every update being meticulously tested by our developers, something can still go wrong. Having a recovery point is essential. For example, you might be using hardware that is not compatible with the update, which is a scenario we cannot fully cover (yet).
```

## Develop, Like Never Before

> APX is one of the most iconic features of Vanilla OS, and in Orchid, it takes on an entirely new role, catering to the needs of developers and creators. With APX v2, you can create customized Linux environments that are seamlessly integrated with the system, just choose your preferred Linux distribution and configure everything to meet your specific requirements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
APX is one of the most iconic features of Vanilla OS, and in Orchid, it takes on an entirely new role, catering to the needs of developers and creators. With APX v2, you can create customized Linux environments that are seamlessly integrated with the system, Just choose your preferred Linux distribution and configure everything to meet your specific requirements.
```

## A new OS, a new Brand...

The new logo is just like the new Vanilla OS. It resembles the previous design, embracing its principles, but has been completely rewritten from scratch to embody precision and elegance, representing its maturity. The transition from the old logo to the new one reflects the fundamental overhaul that Orchid has undergone.

![New Brand](/uploads/new-brand.svg)

This fresh design captures the spirit of innovation and reliability that define Orchid. It’s a visual representation of our commitment to providing an OS that is both familiar and fundamentally enhanced. The updated logo signifies our dedication to merging tradition with cutting-edge advancements, ensuring that Vanilla OS continues to offer a robust and refined user experience.

## ..and a New Wallpaper

What is a new release without an exciting new wallpaper? And ours is truly stunning. Designed by our community member [hrstwn](https://github.com/hrstwn), this vibrant and dynamic wallpaper captures the essence of Orchid.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What is a new release without an exciting new wallpaper? Ours is truly stunning. Designed by our community member hrstwn, this vibrant and dynamic wallpaper captures the essence of Orchid.
```

<before-after-slider beforeImage="/uploads/petals_light.webp" afterImage="/uploads/petals_dark.webp" />

> The new wallpaper is reminiscent of the previous version, but like our brand, it is no longer flat, it has its own dimension and depth. This reflects the evolution of the project itself, moving towards a more sophisticated and refined experience.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The new wallpaper is reminiscent of the previous version, but like our brand, it is no longer flat. It has its own dimension and depth. This reflects the evolution of the project itself, moving towards a more sophisticated and refined experience.
```

We are thrilled with the outcome and believe this wallpaper will greatly enhance the visual experience for all users.

## Make it Truly Yours

> Orchid brings customization to the next level with its  Vanilla Image Builder (Vib). This tool allows advanced users to tailor their Vanilla OS experience precisely to their needs. With Vib you can craft a custom version of Vanilla OS by writing your own configuration and modifications, using a simple YAML configuration file, you have the power to define every aspect of your OS, from the ground up, making it as unique as you are.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Orchid brings customization to the next level with the Vanilla Image Builder (Vib). This tool allows advanced users to tailor their Vanilla OS experience precisely to their needs. With Vib you can craft a custom version of Vanilla OS by writing your own configuration and modifications. Using a simple YAML configuration file, you have the power to define every aspect of your OS, from the ground up, and make it as unique as you are.
```

![Vib Example](/uploads/vib-yml-example.svg)

> Vib utilizes a modular system, providing unparalleled flexibility and ease of use, this system lets you add, remove or adjust specific components within your OS effortlessly. You can integrate additional drivers, codecs, libraries, apply custom configurations, or set up specific startup routines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Vib utilizes a modular system, providing unparalleled flexibility and ease of use. This system lets you add, remove or adjust specific components within your OS effortlessly. You can integrate additional drivers, codecs, libraries, apply custom configurations, or set up specific startup routines.
```
